An evening for James Blish, presented at the Institute of Contemporary Arts at London, February 19, 1976.
James Blish, an American writer, died here in England on the 30th of July, last year. He left a large and distinguished body of work behind him. And I must convince, as his followers, and others of ours are, that at least
some of that work It is seen marked by originality of imagination, by diligence, and by the tedious sense of style, that it is said to form a feminine part of our literary heritage. Already before his death, he had won a
large and devoted filming of Rebuild, Not only here, but in, of course, the United States, and increasingly throughout the rest of the world, as his work became more and more widely translated.
I first got to know him, and this gives me a chance, very briefly, to introduce myself. I work in favor and favors, and many long years ago, in the early fifties, when I first joined the firm, I did serve harboring a secret
vice, which was a passion for sans fiction. And it didn't at first frighten me that I could pursue a favor and favor to embark on sans fiction, but I was involved to share my hand when I discovered that Jesse Saber, the
founder of the film, shared my own secret passion. And I happened to know that a friend of mine, Bruce Montgomery, who wrote the entertaining, first case, detective story, run with the pseudonym of Edmund Crispin.
He, too, shared that passion. And with Deputy Davos' enthusiastic support, I asked Crispin if he would put together for us an anthology of science fiction stories, which he did. And before that, he'd become, in a very
light, a classic anthology, both S.S. which has been followed up by many successors, running out now to best ourselves six, seven, and eventually eight. And in that Boolean collection of short stories, it's like me
and my many people read it, but the outstanding Boolean journey was, along with short story, in a better or by, certainly named to me at that time, James Leish, a case of conscience. So it was through West Asia-Earth and
the case of Cormacians that the name James West first made an impact on my mind. And it's kind of appropriate that today we should be remembering James West since it was due to a christen that had happened. And christen,
who has been very, very serious here, has made a marvelous recovery. And early this morning, he got married. And I was able to congratulate him one morning, and I know he's with us all here tonight. I've been happy to
have him tonight. Well, as a publisher, that might be led me on to inquire about this with other books, and the first books had turned up from America with Earthman Come Home, which had made a spellbind, and I'm afraid
very, very, very useless, throughout a whole boring meeting when I sort of disappeared in Earthman Come Home. We published that, and it was followed in due course by that whole wonderful switches and flight sequence
of novels, which is in effect the greater and higher standard. I personally met him first of all in New York in the middle of my late fifties, and he made a non-forgetful impression that more of a moon-like face with
enormous glasses through which he slightly bubbled at you, and At first, he didn't make very much impression, but as you talk to him, you may spend an evening with him, you realize that he was a person of
extraordinarily wide originality and range and interest, and I took to him very much on a later clip from an issue I stayed with, Jim and his wife, Julie, in an apartment near Washington, which was happily interested
with the most beautiful cats. And very shortly after that, in fact, they decided to leave America, come down, and settle here, near here, in the Thames Valley. And I think it's true to say, Jim settled down most happily
here and felt in the way he'd at last found his place for him. But of course, once they moved to him, and I saw a lot more of them, and I realized more and more and more, how very wide, and to be very curious, was the range of
James Blish's interest and abilities and attainment. Right across from that fiction, he was a musical scholar. He was a great connoisseur of beer, and I'm quite certain that where he's still alive, he'd be an ardent
campaigner for the campaign for real ale. He was, in fact, a first great James Joyce scholar, And, unfortunately, his premature death got short. He was wearing recitation in that field. He regularly attended to the
end of his life, the James Joyce's conferences and the Congresses, and was taken with the utmost respect by the great James Joyce's scholars of today, like Richard Ellman and Tye Hart, and was making contributions towards
that strange and important field of his scholarship. He was educated as a scientist and he knew about physics and, of course, about metaphysics as well. He was learned in the works of the 1912 team, but as a whole of what
I don't call near-fantasy literature,
he was fascinated by black magic and witchcraft and white magic, though I hate the word, he didn't believe any of it. And indeed, his predator there is not short, it would have been a superb book. And that was a great big
non-fiction history of witchcraft and Black Magic. Yeah, I only think tiny, shadow, footnote immortality, I've got myself, again, because in Black Easter, I made the parents, no one makes the parents, I'm happy to say.
It's a little powerful, wise, weight magician, part of my teeth. All this time, when Jim and Judy were living in the Thames Valley near Harpston, I realized that Jim, who had previously suffered from cancer, and very
guaranteeful that this treatment was again, I'm afraid, clearly moving into the closing years of his life, and he'd hardly stayed before his last illness was the most amongst friendliness and fortitude, and with a
rare of all, with a rare pleasure to go and be with and enjoy his talk in his company, he was buried, and I can't imagine a more suitable place, he was buried in some cross church yard in Oxford, in the middle part of Oxford
itself, and not very far from the prison, where his great hero Roger Bacon had been incarcerated for a number of years. It wasn't always a fitting and suitable resting place for him. They are who lies to dare. And as he
had bedded, I thought to myself that his range of interests and his knowledge and his wisdom and the amount of instruction and pleasure I've given so many people entitled him to the title of Doctor Mirabilis. Now,
tonight we have a number of leading and very distinguished people, mainly from the world of science fiction. They're not entirely from that world. And they're all coming here to pay tribute to Jim Blish. Jim Blish's
life and end of the works. Now, first of all, I'm going to ask Peter Nichols of the Science Fiction Foundation and his students to join me on the platform. Uh, now, Peter Nichols will, first of all, tell us what he
remembers about Jim constantly. And after that, I will here, introduce and say something about what was to Jim, the most important novel of the whole lot, World Novelty of the Red. Uh, that's his novel about Roger
Bacon, Dr. Mirabilis. Jim got rid of him six months ago, which was long enough, it seems to me, for the period of morning to be able And the way I understand it, we're here tonight, some of his friends and very many of his
readers, talk about his achievements and the sort of man he was. The night he only spoke tall would be a greater nostalgia, because his books after all are still very much alive. Not many of the people here tonight have
known Jim for very long, to help him in exception in fact, because he didn't come to New England with his work duty until 1968. And by that time, of course, he was very well established in the science fiction world, and
had been publishing his stories for close to 40 years. His first was in 1914, and it was only 19. You can get some of the flavor of Jim's early days in science fiction, until he appeared when he worked as a woodlands,
got married in ... as you see in New York, while reading Damon Knight's chapter in the book, Hell's Cartographers. In that chapter, Damon Knight spends a lot of time talking about the young SF fans and
writers who lived in New York in the 40s, and found a group called the Futurians. It included Damon Knight himself, Damon, Robert Lownes, Fred Pohl, Juno Morrow, and Sarah Cundit. The old Knight tells it that they
were rather shabby years. A group of rather only native and shy young people, gauche, lonely, and in several cases, prone to disastrous first marriages, and all the things that emerges between the minds rather than
women, have not that good. Nothing thought seems to have endured the period. I don't think they did. And from the point of view of his development as a writer, the thought was more slow time for him, though he had other
opinions to his credit. He meant to fly a light plane, which is a fact he's seen up in the library publicized about him. He got a science degree at Lutkes. He did very little work as a practicing scientist, and he dropped
his postgraduate research to Columbia to become a writer. There's all these stories from the first ten years or so you're not very distinguished. Jim was obviously a slow and careful loner of his craft, advancing it
by imperceptibly degrees, but the only way it exists could be momentum with a juggernaut. had only one to come together for him in the 50s, helped, as he was admitted, with John W. Campbell's sympathetic assistance.
Now, if you look at the chronology, it's interesting. The old key short stories, later to be collected as a novel author when we come home, began to appear in 1950. The story of Billy Stark, later part of the novel,
Titan's Daughter, appeared in 1952, as did surface tension. Later a part of the pseudo-model, the Sidley Stiles, which is really more of a collection of short stories, and also the model of Jack of Eagles in that year. A
case of conscience, originally appeared in 1953, as did the story Common Time. The short story Boop, a very good one, might have become part of Jim's most recently published model, The Quincunx of Time, appeared in
1954. A very fine short story, A Work of Art, which features a future incarnation of his favorite composer, Richard Strauss, appeared in 1956. What come right here, for anyone familiar with Jim's work, is what the
Mosul in which years, those years from 1950 to 1955 were, more especially was Jim was not a full-time writer then. Indeed, he told me he used to write in the train commuting backwards and forwards to his job in New York.
That's how a case of conscience got written. You can't help noticing, too, how life is here while ... Jim goes. He never met a piece of good prose going to waste. Again and again, the better story is re-emerged
some years later. Carefully and thoughtfully integrated into a larger work, and often slightly rewritten, in the process. I met Jim in 1971, by which time his literary career was by no means over. Though it had been
badly slowed down by ear, health, worry, And it has to be said, a very severe latter's block. He never quite recovered from the cancer, but first afflicted him in the middle 60s. And of course, his field was all founded,
although it was another and quite different form of cancer that killed him. But in the 70s, we did see the day after judgment, mid-summer century. And I think we ought to mention those whiskling written Star Trek
books. which Jim always referred to disparagingly as his bread and butter, for which we're very often written with a great deal of dash in school, and gave a lot of people a lot of closure. He was certainly indirectly
responsible for getting me my present job. I saw an advertisement in the Times which read, Wanted, Administrator for Science Fiction Foundation. I was convinced that it had to be a joke. There was some sort of
ghastly, hole-in-corner operation run by a bunch of eccentrics. Nonetheless, I did inquire, and when I learned that James Blish was one of the prominent founders of the organization, I instantly and
enthusiastically applied. Because, Jim, along with Alfred Bester, Fred Pohl, and Sue Caldwell, was one of the four writers who had most kindled my enthusiasm for SF when I began to read it in the early 50s. And I've had
no cause other since to change my mind. I still believe that those four men did more than any others to improve the standards of magazine SF and to widen its range at a period of time when that kind of reform was badly
needed. I met him soon after I got the job and he became good friends. He was rather a shy man who, because of his illness, looked a little older than he was. Indeed, he looked rather frail. But after a while, as Charles
intimated, you found yourself conscious of his expression rather than his physical appearance. had very sharp eyes, which always looked very directly at you when he talked, and he had a grin which appeared and
disappeared with startling suddenness. He was a serious man, but far from solemn. He had a strong mischievous streak, which could emerge in some moods as cutting irony, and even as a kind of wild capering, like some
wise fool, a jester out of Shakespeare. Otherwise remember him singing in a cracked voice, a strass aria, wasn't supposed to be sung by Clytemnestra. He sang at first, as it normally was sung, and then as he thought it
should be sung, in the second version, it was very much better. There was an extraordinary performance. A few years ago, he played the Wizard of Oz at a convention fancy dress competition, and he was splendidly, if
unexpectedly, right to the pot. He drank a fair amount, but in the several drinking sessions I had with him, he was always very much sober than me at the end. In fact, his capacity was legendary. Even Harry Harrison had
to admit defeat on one occasion. And that was only the day before Jim had to go into hospital and have half of a lung removed. He was amazing. He smoked heavily, too. I report these things one more time to make Jim out to be
some kind of wild rake, which he certainly was not. In fact, he was very much a gentleman in the old fashioned and best sense of that word. I really want to stress the paradox that Jim, behind what was often quite
literally a smokescreen, is a very sober man indeed. His passions were intellectual. At a party he wasn't enjoying, he could look polite, but bored for hours, or silently drift away like one of the cats that he so much
loved. But when the talk got good, you couldn't get Jim to go to bed. He'd talk until the sun rose again in the morning, and often did, unless forced as usual to give up by the lesser stamina of others. He'd talk about
general relativity, James Joyce, politics, medieval scholasticism, science fiction, poetry, music, cabbages, or kings. In fact, Jim was a wholly traditional scholar, who seldom had the opportunity to practice
his scholarship except in his fiction, where sometimes he used it downright wickedly and inappropriately, as in the Star Trek novel, Spock Must Die, where the secret intergalactic communications code is based
with insane irrelevance and the Joycian language is coming in his way.
I'm working to talk about Jim's science special. I'll move up to Mark Adler, who's coming on later, beyond saying that he was an important pioneer. He was one of the very few members of his generation who continuously
and consciously endeavored with a great deal of success to raise the intellectual standards of OSF, to sharpen its scientific accuracy and to increase especially the range and depth of its metaphysical
speculation. I want to finish by saying a few words about the book of Jim's of our most valued, Dr. Mirabilis, which he began to write in the late 50s, while he was becoming increasingly a sick man, which was finally
published after many difficulties in 1965. My friendship with Jim dates for safety from the time of our first meeting, When I told him that Dr. Mirabilis was my favorite of all his novels, and he was quite delighted. I
know now that I didn't know then, it was of all his books, it was the one to which he had the most passionate commitment. And yet, it hasn't ever been very popular. He used to complain, in fact, about the popularity of his
much unapologised short story, Surface Tension. He couldn't see why it was so successful when, for example, Dr. Mirabilis was not. I know why, but very obvious. But just the same, I think that Dr. Mirabilis is the
closest thing to a great novel that Jim wrote. I actually think it is a great novel. It's not a word you use readily. But despite its flaws, some of which are obvious, it's a great novel. And I think that very slowly it will
come to be seen as a classic historical novel. If you don't know it, it's a fictional biography of the 13th century film-making and scientist, Roger Bacon. As Jim says in the introduction, there's so little known
about the facts of Bacon's life Well, this book is in fact a fiction, rather than a biography. But what a fiction. The reason why it has become very popular is that it's very difficult. And the reason why it's difficult
is also the reason why it's great. The book undertakes a conceptual loop, unlike anything else I've ever come across in historical fiction. Let me explain. In the most popular kind of historical fiction, you get An
adventure story is staged in an imaginary past, with some colorful stage settings, some exotic clothes, and perhaps some swordplay. The psychology, however, is contemporary. The characters behave in a way that is
familiar to modern readers, acting on letters with which the modern reader can easily identify, and this, by the way, is usually also true of science fiction. A much better kind of historical novel, such as those
written by Alfred Duggan, Who, by the way, was a known biologist, one of the two leaders, I believe, who advised...to Dr. Mirabilis in the first place. Duggan always strained for accuracy, not only at historical
events and plays in speech, but also from accuracy of psychology and feeling. Duggan, for example, understood very well, but it was useless trying to use later concepts of romantic love in dealing with, say, the
sexual life of the mangrove sex and king. Blish went one step further. In Dr. Mirabilis, he goes deeper than questions of dress or setting, or even psychological and political motivation. He tries to move the reader
into understanding how, 700 years ago, the farthest man of the age envisaged the nature of the universe. He takes us, that is, directly into questions of philosophy and metaphysics. And these aren't irrelevant,
hard-wired questions, as he shows. The teachings of the church at that time, and the nature of God and His creation, had a quite direct effect on what could or could not happen in everyday life. There was a certain kind
of thinking, for example, that saw what we now think of as being experimental science as unnecessary or even evil, hence the slowness of advances in medicine, for instance. Dr. Mirabilis is in effect a novel about the
creation of science. The word science, or Cientia, existed then, but it meant something quite different. Bacon, along with Peter Peregrine, and some other figures, such as Duns Scotus and William Mavocan, who
don't come into Blish's book because they were both born when Roger Bacon was quite an old man. These figures didn't invent experimental science per se, because that had always existed in some form or another.
Sometimes called craft, sometimes magic, and sometimes alchemy. Now, what these men did, especially Bacon, was to invent a world thinking about the universe, which gave an intellectual shape, a method of
organization, and a conceptual framework within which experimental science could become more than a series of randomly collated facts and findings. And it's very typical of Jim that he chose to write on the
conceptual organizer rather than the experimenter. It literally closed down that aspect of the bacon myth that stresses his experimental work. Indeed, he points out that a larger part of Bacon's experiments were
carefully repetitive testing his earlier experiments, many of them reported in Aristotle, rather than original work. He does, however, allow that part of the myth, which alludes to Bacon's invention of
gunpowder. He allows that to be possibly true. Well, interestingly, he puts the invention down to a vision, which I think will be led to us in a minute. after all gunpowder had been previously known in China and in the
Middle East. We all wouldn't call it a new discovery. Something you may be familiar with, with a third-rate book called The History of Western Philosophy written by Bertrand Russell. Russell comments, Bacon was not,
to my mind, so scientific, as is sometimes thought. And the instances, the prior existence of gunpowder, as an example of what he means, Blish, so steep as in this. Dr. Mirabilis is an amazingly fit of scholarship in
thought, from a man with absolutely no formal trunnion philosophy, very little trunnion in the history of science, and at the time he began writing it, no Latin. And yet Blish saw the essence of Bacon's work, which
Bertrand Russell could not see. Blish did this in part by putting himself in command of the obscure and difficult jargon of the medieval schoolmen, and understanding it. He's even over to show in the most amazing single
passage of the book that when Bacon wrote on what was then called the multiplication of species, he was really talking about the propagation of force. In this work, Bacon made the conceptual leap forward which
carried him up to envisaging a space-time continuum in the 13th century, a metrical framework of the universe, in fact, a thinking which brought him to the wrong fumes before his own activity. To me, the whole book is
absolutely gripping. I grant its difficulty, but the difficulty is so much a part of the performance that nobody could surely regret it. And in effect, this difficulty stems from the relation between the word and the
thing. It isn't only a question of vocabulary. It's a question of the world's picture which analyzed that vocabulary. This seduces us into the meaning of your mind. Most notably when he gives us in full detail the iron
examination in which Roger Bacon wins his secular master of arts at the University of Paris.
I'll skip a bit here, many of them. The only comparison I can think of for Jim's book is women golden with the inheritors, which is also a novel about conceptual breakthrough, and also a difficult novel, as such novels
must always be. because the attempt is to create a truly alien mode of thought in modern language, a language which is itself molded by the way that we think. The inheritors by Golding tells of neolithic men beginning to
conceptualize their universe. In a sense, what from the analyst does the same? Only more alarmingly, in that its pool is so wide and close to our own. There is a popular and sentimental view that humanity doesn't
really change much, and that we're all subject to the same kinds of feelings, the same ways of thinking, and have been for thousands of years. Partly true, but not wholly true. Reading Dr. Mirabilis is an admirable
collective for those who take a sentimental view about the continuity of history. It is, of course, SF as well as very historical fiction. Conceptual breakthrough has always been the basic subject of SF. and it's
present as much in Dr. Mirabilis as in the seedling stars, more so in a way. Certainly, if the way we think changes is much in the next 700 years, as this shows them to have changed in the last 700, and according to Alvin
Toffler, the weight of change is itself accelerating, then most science fiction set in the future is fatuously limited, simply in creating worlds which are too much like our own. Finally, Roger Bacon, it must be
said, is James Blish. And therefore, all the more admirable for not being rendered as heroic. He is shown to be a fumbling, thick-skinned and awkward man in human relations, a slow and repetitive thinker, a man who
doesn't always realize the importance of his own ideas, a man obsessed by partly useless activity, such as a kind of encyclopedic finalist without billions, such as might be expected from an accountant rather than a
great thinker. Bacon has shown to be very much a man of his time, whose acts of moral courage are occasionally balanced by acts of moral cowardice. I don't mean that Roger Bacon is modeled on the author. I do mean that the
author was obviously enormously attracted by the achievements and even the presumptive personality of Bacon. and therefore much to his credit that he did not sentimentalize the man whom he must surely have seen as a
kind of medieval alter ego. Anyone who knew Jim must necessarily be especially moved by his account of logic, because there were so many places in the earth of God rigorously distanced throughout a trace of
self-indulgence. I first read the book long before I met Jim, and even then I knew this to be one of the most acceptable novels I'd ever read. Long after it was written, Jim made it retrospectively the first part of the
trilogy, whose overall title is After Such Knowledge. Blish himself described the theme of the trilogy as, is the desire for secular knowledge, let alone the acquisition and use of it, and misuse of the mind, and
perhaps even actively evil, Certainly, this film plays a prominent role in Doc and the Iblis and also in Black Easter, The Diary of Judgment and Case of Conscience, the other books in the series. The title, After Such
Knowledge, comes from T. S. Eliot's poem, Gerontion. And I read the lines because they sum up which is seen beautifully and in a more user than the symbolic way that he does himself. They're from the third stanza of the
poem. After Such Knowledge, What Forgiveness, Think now. History has many cunning passages, contrived corridors and issues, deceives with the whispering ambitions, guides us by vanities. Think now. She gives
when our attention is distracted. And what she gives, gives with such subtle confusions that the giving famishes the craving. Gives too late what's not believing. or is still believed in memory only, reconsidered
passion. Drives too soon into weak hands, what thought can be dispensed with till the refusal propagates a fear. Think, neither fear nor courage serves us. Thus the musings, stone, sad, and ironical, appear so to its
old man. There are thoughts that can readily be found in much of Blish also, But my own theory is that he thought the guy was worth the candle. He knew the dangers of the acquisition of knowledge, the guilt that goes
evading the apple, but he loved it anyway. Roger Bacon dreams at one point, which will be led to, of modern war, of Armageddon. And he understands the vision as a possible result of his work. But the sheer intellectual
passion and devotion, even the love with which he throws himself into normal, and he will spot the dangers, shows clearly enough that the emotional commitment of the orphan married, even if it was intimate, the real
person has steps as quickly as possible, away from knowledge, and back to the innocent joys of the original garden. We might have shown the fear of man, that this at least was ready to make the best of it, to risk that
maketh forgiveness, which in his case, of course, is only meddling in God, and that must have all I'd like to say that this has been rather an academic sort of introduction for years, but I'd like to apologize because he
himself was primarily an academic sort of man in the very best sense. He never talks down or wrote down. He assumed otherwise that the reader or listener would be as intelligent as himself. I appreciated the
compliment as his friend, and I'm sure you were aided too, whether it was his friends or readers. I shouldn't distinguish between friends and readers. I thought myself to be his friend before I'd run met him. And I know
that many others thought the same. Now I end with students and we'll read the next track from Dr. Mirabilis.
All right. Roger Bacon, still a young man, but already making a name for himself, goes to Paris University in the hope of being allowed to teach Aristotelian philosophy there. This, of course, is Paris' 13th century.
a mixture of filth and finery, reason and bigotry, the home of disease and disputatious scholars. The university is burdened with ages-old philosophies, endlessly re-quoted and reinterpreted by commentators.
In this unlikely place, Bacon discovers a group of proto-scientists and attends one of their clandestine alchemical matinees. However, matters go awry, and most of those present are rendered unconscious by the
fumes from all the experiments. Bacon eventually attends with him that night, still feeling ill, and begins to reread his copy of The Secret of Secrets, a letter to Alexander the Great from his teacher, Aristotle. In
it, are descriptions of the means whereby certain elements may be attained, including personal, political, and military power. What we would recognize as formulae, they can reflect on what he has read, and
gradually the voice of his inner self begins to debate with him, that prefaces one of the major crises in his life. Yet these matters, and the most secretive secrets of this kind, have always hidden from the rank and
file of philosophers, and particularly so after men began to abuse science, telling to evil what God granted in full measure for the safety and advantage of man, until he should strive But the wonderful and ineffable
utility and splendor of experimental science may appear, and the pathway of a seantia universalis be again opened. And that's by thee. Down hall! Roger shouted. He swallowed and resumed his perch on the stool.
Bought out the hour, he said quietly. I demand that answer, in the name of Jesus Christ our Lord. For a while there was no answer. and regenerated within the darkness beyond the candle flame, there were strange
amorphous patches of color, pulsing and delusive. Moreover, his giddiness was worse. Was that still a sweet vitriol, or was he in truth working too long as women? I am the raven of Elias. That is blasphemous and
untrue. Hachovsky, tell me who thou art. I am the man. What man is this? Tell me thy signification, O Philex, O Philex, be straight. Thou art the man. Speak on. Thou art the man shall bring back into the world the sea and
tell universe size. Thou shalt make a written edifice unto the glory of thy Lord. All the help I shall give thee, that be required. How? As food brought unto Elias in the desert? Thy nativeness shall touch heaven, and on
its brow the written knowledge is power. These cadences were putting into sleep. Almost he failed to see the trap, the self-same trap into which the builders of Babel had fallen. Nay, moral philosophy is the pinnacle
for the ways nothing can touch heaven. How dost thou know, O Jesus Christ? or by the light of knowledge the Church of God is governed. The commonwealth of the faithful is regulated. The conversion of unbelievers is
secured and those who persist in their malice can be held in check by the excellence of knowledge so that they may be driven off from the borders of the Church in a better way than by the shedding of Christian blood.
is the meaning of that saying, knowledge is power. All matters requiring the guidance of knowledge are reduced to these four heads, but no more, the self saying. It is strange and horrifying to hear discourse on these
matters weighty and unusual in that same remote, bodyless, tuneless wine. So it's saying only to amuse itself. The pages of the secrets of secrets wavered and blurred before him, and he closed the book. He could think
of nothing else to ask. He was suspended in ecstasy of disbelief. And that emptiness, the self, sang suddenly. Time is... Yes, I'll just say. It is a subject of lotion. But I don't. Time was... sang the self. Time was...
behind the voice of music, which seemed to hear an endless mirroring of echoes. He's just a bad dog, he used to be a bad one, to say to Sterling. The little ones came forth, all in a little slivered, whereon we know that
time is single and linear, and give it up one age belonging to all ages. There's no necessary confusion, doubted by no one skilled as philosophy. No easy to post the sacred letters to physical doctors, but they have
agreement to have you. Who tries to find his vaccine with me? Who? The man's hung. Point to the candle flame, bowed up and down, like a fisherman's float, lower the bubbles. When the self-spoke again, its distant sign
of the space was as terrible as the strokes of a gong of glass. Time is past. The candle went out. Went from the darkness, there rose rank upon rank of armored men with thousand faces, and the faces were sheep, and the
faces of demons too bright in their chain to look upon, masked under the invisible sun, passing in their thousands as men who marched to the last great engagement. And with them, thousands on horseback, and more than
animals not yet seen in the world, had many bearing strange engines, and that their heads was anti-Christ, Yet in a trotling, always terrible post-trank, so that each man was no bigger than a grain of millet, and that
even this Emmett army was turned out of sight, as an image vanishes when the grass is turned, and north left behind for the white cats of St. Torrent, stretching to the far horizon as if one looked in vain across a
straight-up coming invader. Things moved like levard and beneath the waters, but there were angels, and there were men in them, And there were dragons in the air, like the dragons of the Ethiopians, yet there were men
in them. And there were moles under the earth, and men waved in them, all in mail, and with terrible consonances. And one wearing a cowl came and stowed upon the headlands above the wide waters, and held up such glasses
as was necessary to show forth these things. And the mayors turned, and there, across the wide waters, was the self-sane army, both close again. Yet now, every man was as great as a giant across that distance, So as
every link in the mail could be counted, and the mills moved, and the head of him and the cowl appeared in the air above the army, greater than any of they, and, warming as it were, the fowl set a furnace, yet was not there.
And many of those giants threw down their engines at war and fled, yet the host came on. And he made in the air certain compositions, which a man might know only by smelling them, or not at all. But on came that
inexhaustible host, and that their head was anti-Christ. And he and the cow all bowed out his hand over the wide waters. They were parming it with certain crystals like salt painter from the Dunheap. And he wrapped the
crystals in a scrap of parchment without any writing on it, and cast it into the wind, and he was crying, lupus, lupus, lupus, lupus, lupus, lupus, lupus, lupus, lupus. where to let army have seemed to fall in a single
flash of lightning, and where the roar of such sharp thunder that the cowl flew from the skull of him that had cried out, and he fell, dwindling away to nothing like an ever-abamming lamp cast into the sea. After that,
for a long time, it was darkness and silence. It is not the nothingness of sleep in which the consciousness of time itself is obliterated, so that in an instant the night is gone that wakeful men could rise forth, time
passed. But when events marked it, and that sable silence could not be known. No words spoken reached the ears, nor any touch penetrated. Then he mourned, and heard, and confused light passed before his closed glids.
And while it was gone, in the near darkness he almost awoke, drawing a breath only to discover that he could hardly breathe. And when he was soaked in sweat, someone no longer near him And there was an answer. He
understood neither. Now, however, he could fall into truth. Now, while Margaret Loudon and Richard Cutler joined me here on the platform for their short musical interval, that reminded us of Jim's very great
devotion to music and his great interest in music, which was of very scholarly interest. First of all, we can extract from a very rarely performed opera by by Richard Strauss, the Egyptian Helen, which was Jim's
favorite opera. And after that, there will be a record which is of even greater rarity and of very considerable personal interest.
[Music.]
In the 1940s, James Blish and some friends started to get a very small record company, Samuel Records. And this record, the one I'm going to hear now, is the very first record we ever made.
Let's see, it's a counter of what I've got in my life by song, song Morgan's turn, and the piano is to go to Munich.
[Music.]
Now, Mark Adnard and Mr. Kuyper have joined me. Mark Adnard has been to talk
principally about Jim Blish as a scientist, and, Richard Kunz Kuyper will read
from one of his best known and most remarkable works, one that I referred to in my introduction, A Case of Conscience. Well, I would dispute the fact that my talk slightly is rather more mixed than that. James Blish had many of the characteristics of the writers who appeared in the 40s and in the early 50s and changed the
nature of science fiction. Like me, the best of them, he had received a scientific education and no science fiction writer had a great respect for what Jim called the science in science fiction. He produced His
character, I know him as a character, but what is sometimes called hard and suffering ideas. He was good at inventing credible hardware, such as Alice Four, which was used in the building of the Bridge on Jupiter in the
National House Stars. And the sun material was used for the bones of Sweeney in the Seeding Program. It was in Seeding Program also that he gave it the word panthropy. to indicate an alternative strategy to what Jack
Williamson had called much earlier, terraforming. Many of his SF fictions were derived from what he called the blacked-jack equations which had been fictionally justified in the building of the Jupiter Bridge and
which led to the construction of the spin building. Perhaps the most famous, or one of the most famous, of the fictional interstellar drives and the chief narrative power in the what can't be known as the
sickle-sinned flight series. The rapid direct form of it comes up again and again. It is the basis of the development of ESP in Jack of Eagles and the direct communicator for talking about interstellar businesses was
one of numerous spin-offs from the original equation.
that there is much more to Jim Blish than this. In him, this respect for the facts and possibilities of science is part of a broader passion for intellectual knowledge and sometimes of a search for ultimate truth. This
preoccupation appears again and again in the fiction. Toward the end of his most popular story, surface tension, the dying pirate says, there is nothing that knowledge cannot do. In earthmen come home, Amalfi
says to the assembly of Okie... that's the priceless coin, gentlemen, the universal coin, human knowledge. And then in Dr. Mirabilis, he found what he'd opened on his deathbed, asking God to forgive him for
having pursued power and intellectual truth, instead of only the latter. And then in Black Easter, the protagonist has sacrificed everything in pursuit of knowledge. This concern with intellectual truth was
closely linked with the problem of moral choice in the existence of evil. The question is dramatized in the Jesuit intelligence of Willis Sanchez, the scientist priest in the case of conscience. In Jim's system of
thought, in this scale, and to use one of his favorite words, it wasn't merely justifiable it was necessary sometimes to help people who offended against the intellectual and the model of code. Jeremy Malthy said,
the first freedom is freedom to hope. In a personal letter from Jim, one of the matters, he described Jeremy Malthy as one of his favorite characters. The people who were hated often appeared as snakes in early
technology and the model of life of the stars. The most hated figure is Frank Lutz, the manager of the most evil of the tramp cities. But he said of him that he has no more feeling than a snake. And then in the later
tetralogy, in the mortal case of conscience, it seems that the product of the fertilized egg may return to the seamless planet of Lithia and again play the role of the first of all snakes. I said a bit later with Jim on one
of those famous mornings. And it is currently the characteristics of various kinds of snake, happily without naming any names. The catalogue of snake-like furlings seemed to be almost interminable. Now, I almost
ended down all this. There was traffic dancing with pretty nipples in a nearby corner. I said almost. I thought that, I suppose, was the traditional Christian bill that one should hate the same and not the same. And I
tried to support my arguments by rather badly remembering the quotation from Othello. Jim said, Othello could support my case better if I used a different text, and it promptly delivered a long and full quotation in
Italian. When he finished, I asked him what it was. Italian, it was from Boreto's libretto, for Verdi's Attello, And it has to be a superior to the Shakespearean verses, from which it is derived. I felt somewhat cut
down, particularly as I knew Jim as primary, as... I noted that a considerable time after this, I reviewed some of Jim's short stories for the fans in Cypher. I said, as a tribute to Jim's art, that
one couldn't help hating the people who were responsible for the evil handmaids. in such stares as tomb tappel. I served a friendly but firm letter from Jim, told my attention that evening, some years before, and
pointing out that I had changed sides since our last discussion.
Things like this made Jim a very formidable friend. It was alarming when he indicated, in a few casual words, that he was taking master of a complete field of knowledge, which one had hitherto been scarcely aware of. It
was even more alarming when he indicated in a few more words that he considered this obscure field of knowledge to be helpful and relevant to whatever it was he was trying to talk to him about. Now, in the first British
Milford Conference, Jim Cannon, with a well-worn, over-staffed Tasha case, imagined that it was crammed with our manuscripts and James Acklin made notes upon them. He sat there with the felt surgical scar on his
neck. The gin and tonic held him a hand. The chambered so much that he had the eyes clipped against the glass. With the silhouette on the other hand, and which he drew continuously by the section of his cheeks. And with
his slightly rougher eyes, it was so terrible intent, and so terrible sincere, and so terribly honest. And I'm thinking that if a special part of heaven were set aside for science fiction people, Then Kim would have a
seat around at the very top. He'd be sad if it had decided. Because he'd put the fear of God into more science fiction writers than any man who ever
lived. Kim wants an example, or mostly called, I think, Tupperism. That is...
and it's probably now, who's the lithium, hands over the gift that he's promised to give to the priest.
It was only a short journey to the clearing where the mighty spindle of the ship stormed nearly to weave its way back through the geodesics of deep space to the sun that shone on Peru. There's even some sunlight here,
facing down there through low-scutting clouds. It will be late in the morning and we'll begin again soon enough. The baggage went on board soon we lay and we have any fuss? So did the specimens, the planes, the tapes,
the special reports, the recording, the sample cases, the slide boxes, the variants, the typecultures, the pressed plants, the animal cages, the tubes of soil with chunks of ore, the lithium manuscripts in their
atmospheres of helium. Everything was lifted recklessly by the cranes and swung inside. At once, he went up the creek still up first, and he clearly was following him, a barracks bag slung over one shoulder. On the
ground, Cleaver was stirring some last-minute bit of deer, something that seemed to require delicate, almost reverent, begging down before the cranes could be allowed to take it in their indifferent grip. Cleaver
was politically motherly about his electronic operations. Ruth Sanchez took advantage of the delay to look around once more at the moored margins of the forest. At once, he saw a shbaker. The leafling was standing at
the entrance to the path the earthen reserves had taken from the city to reach the ship. He was carrying something. Cleaver swore under his breath and undid something he had just done to do it in another way. Leith
Sanchez raised his hand. Immediately, Staker walked toward the ship. The great Leith's strides, which nevertheless seemed almost leisurely, I wish you a good journey, the Michigan same, wherever you may go. I
wish also that your ways may lead back to this world of some future time. I have brought you the gift that I sought before to give you, if the moment is now appropriate. Cleaver had straightened up, and was now growing up
suspiciously at the lithium. He said he did not understand the language. He was unable to find anything to which he could object. He simply stood there and radiated his unwelcomeness. Thank you, Miss Sanchez said.
This creature of Satan made him miserable all over again, making him feel intolerably in the wrong. But how could she think and know? The lifting was holding up to the small vase, sealed at the top, and provided the two
jiffy lifting handles. The glowy porcelain in which it had been made still carried inside it under the glaze, the fire which had formed it. It exists in the mind, with man-cruising festoons and creams and windows, and
the form of the whole which has made any quarter of priests abandon his trade in shame. It was so beautiful that one could imagine no use for it at all. Certainly, one could not make a man from it, or take his left over boots
and put it in the refrigerator, besides it would take up too much space. This is the gift, Staker said. It is the finest container yet to come out of Kharadesh to Kirtan. The material of which it is made includes traces of
every element to be found in Lithia, even including iron. And thus, as you see, it shows the colors of every shade of emotion and of thought. On earth, it will tell earthen much of Lithia. You will be unable to analyze it,
Ruth Sanchez said. It is too perfect to destroy, too perfect even to open. Ah, but we wish you to open it, St. Joseph said, for it pertains our other gift. Another gift? Yes, and a more important one. It is a fertilized
living egg of our species. Take it with you. By the time you reach out, it's going to hatch, and we'll be ready to blow up the human most trained and marvelous world. The container is the gift of all of us. But the child
inside is my gift, for it is my child. Appalled, Ruth Stanton took the vows and crumbling hands of those who expected it to explode as indeed he did. It shook with subdued flame in his grip. "'Goodbye,' Stata said. He
turned and walked away, back towards the entrance to the path, came to watch him go, shading his eyes. Now, what was there a lot about it, as you just said? That snake couldn't have made a bigger thing out of it. He'd been
handing his own hood on a platter, and all the time it was only a joke. He could not have spoken even to himself. He turned away and began to ascend the peaks, craving the vows carefully in one ear, though it was not the gift
of hope to bring into the holy city to the grand indulgence of all mankind. No, but it was all he had. While he was still climbing, a shadow passed rapidly over the hull, Kleevo's last crate being worn aloft with the hull
by a crane. When he was in the oar lock, on the rising wind, the ship's newest generators wound him. A mounting shot to sunlight was cast ahead of him, picking up his shadow on the deck. How come now a second shadow
overlaid and blurred his own cleavers? Then the light dimmed and went out. The air locked door slammed.
But John Browner and Josephine Saxton are coming on the platform now. One of James Blish's most intense and private passions was for poetry. Not only the poetry of other people, but his own poetry. Though it's not a
very lovely name, he did write poetry himself and some of it was published all over the American magazines, most games, more magazines, but a few poems with some of the prestigious academic reviews. John Donald is a
little bit about James Blish himself, and through his own memories of him, and then he'll be able to pork, eh, and James Blish.
It is perhaps not as widely recognized among his readership as it should be that, as well as a masterly writer of prose, We lost from the last chance, but apparently a considerable range and power with a compact,
condensed, and highly personal approach.
I was, as Charles has just said, literally intending to preface this short reading with some comments of my own, but I feel It is best that this little-known aspect of James' work speak on its own behalf. And I've been
fortunate in being given by Judith Blish a collection of his poems which she assures me are among his own great favorites. This is called Orcs in Phoenix. single-hearted, lack-stopping mother of unicorns, lifting
your helix-scorched solvers from the mortal-less-worthy, poised, bleeped and shy to haunt the remote-empty quarter, virgin and abean, illusive, gentle-imagined, antelope horse of sweet and motorless dream we
have trapped you now in our industrial desert. Outside you'll have heard of toad and imprisoned zodiac ministers be poisoned in the dead-classy drops. The new tombs, tombs of St. Mary and Sally, are waiting in
earthquake. We, the moon and the other tombs, stare and fall to believe. Our girls, lackless, weep of the fire from heaven, give you to see you wonder and laugh at your story. you who shall shake your beauty forever in
the protection.
This, called Sun of the Eye, includes some of the most famous anagrams in all of history, those in which Galileo concealed his discoveries concerning the natures of the planets. Sun of the Eye. How can I tell I'm the
young first child of Gwinta or I? When you again, forgive me, make sure, though those captures are, and the street was fostered are, my body is world-line stud, as yours, eccentric, nephrobial, as the 11th
compounding of Ganymede, sneaking a sip from the chasm. All of us, lente, covite, I understood that was, at the stall of its geodesic, not flinging before, except in phrase, where he be much removed, is not, nor am I
much. afraid. In love with Malcolm O'Reilly, the ace, the actor of Martin, it is my star's removie at heart. I am staid, as old as Ireland, as green as Comet's hair, caught from the Jovian shoulder, parametric to his
customary need. The placer does not change. He is quick for tone quicker, and the cusps of the darker square Forgive me. I shake my name and hope. Not changing the word. Quintiae, Figueroa, Senolato, Nato, Ramon. Is
that Alice?
This is called theory of the right option. The poem and twisted consciousness is known in the Macy's Square. and bears its journey armed to be taken through each sentence with a lifted lead. The drawing where she is the
thing down, the indifusible stone joined at the carpenter who shot his stone by a total loss of blood. but does be true in our memory. Stick heart, plays no toll. If it weren't for the stone, also the oil, but that's just
true, but it was in the crowd, it shied its hat, and so it speak in her ear to mutter out the clarion-headed honk, freight it, and wear their spear, in lines just entered of incident song.
And this is called That was also his first line. Tabby, dead, saw this off. His thirsty sickness punished. With such cure, he watched the dripping tarp tick in the way, as though an actor had worked, which was anew. The
dead, not tragic, in the cure, but in the eye. Stoken side through affairs and silver time issues and the hands that once loved. And death, the open word with planets to destroy after a loop so generous of girls and
miserly of water. And the beef-coast bridge, father of God's dream and sword's cure for silver child, contempt to yield up his small joy.
And as a particular favour, I've asked the chairman to make me to add to the use of poems by Jim, something which I did not know until he was no longer with us. He's very, very loved. And it says so much of what I would like to
say, but I feel it better simply to read you the name of the maker of William Dunbar. Is that to you, alas, and gladness, and trouble, nor the great sickness, and favoritory infirmity? Timor mutt is contour but me. That
placence here is all vain, lull, this false world is pertuncatory, that flesh is brackled, a fiend is sleeved. Timor mutt is contour but me. The state of man does change and vary, no sound, no sick, no life, no seary, no
dance, no mirror, no look today. To not, not, just control but me. No state and earth to stand is sicker. As would be when you were just the witness of this world's vanity. To not, not, just control but me. And to that great
course I listatis, princes, proletes, and patistatis, with rich and poor all at all degree, to mock, mock, just don't talk about me. He took his knights into the field, and I met under herring and shield, victor, he is
at all melee. To not mock, discontrol about me, that strong unnessful gerand, takes on the mother's breast-suck, and the baby full of the dignity. To not mock, discontrol about me, he takers the campion in the stower,
and the captain cloths it in the tower, the lady in bower full of beauty. To not mock, discontrol about me, he spares no lord for his presence, no clerk for his intelligence, his office break may no man see. To not, not
discontour but me. At magicians and astrologers, writers, magicians and theologians, then help us no concrucianly. To not, not discontour but me. In nearest and nearest practitioners, leeches, surgeons and
physicians, the surf of death may not simply. To not, not discontour but me. I see that Knackers, among the lay, Plays here the pageants, Singers to grave, Spirits is not their faculty. He must not this control but me.
Then he must all my brethren, He will not let me live alone. Of course, I man his next gravy. He must not this control but me. Since for the bed-bed, only it is known bestest that we thought death to spoil after our death,
but may we to not mock this controlled bed-bed. Incomprehensibly, our ancestors preferred future faction of the evolution. They were inbound wrapped in sheets of lead to a store it in coffins and a bolt. When my time
comes, I want to grow into a stork, a leaf, a flower, and a game of corn. Thank you, James Blish.
Josephine Sacks, to me, is, another thing, he's going to give us a
glimpse of some of the works which James Blish left behind along his breath, and
which are, as yet, unpublished.
A few months before his death, about 10 months ago, I remember, James Blish asked me to collaborate on another within. It was a science fiction novel, and he's been nursing the idea for about a year. After
consideration, about a minute, I consensus. James was not only a writer, He was a mixed need teacher and critic. And I put well enough of his mind to not show him it. He put well enough of my work to believe that we could
make a great success of the project. With enthusiasm, our work began. This evening, I'm about to reach you a short piece, which he wrote and gave to me to ask what I thought of it. This is part of the message. I've chosen it
because it's a typical piece of hair on how to burn myself. Those who live inside doors may be surprised or so he felt. A great joke which we should with the certainty that our universe was never guessed which bit had been
written by Richard O'Frock. I was actually, this is a little friendship, you see, I was this evening to look right through James Joyce. I have read other things to James Blash on occasion, and he said that he loved to
listen to my voice because of, I presume, what he imagined to be its Welsh accent. I practiced reading the famous Ann Olivia passage in a Welsh accent, and somehow it left a sense of meaning. So that is why I feel this
little reading of a work which I am left to complete by myself. perhaps, from the clocks, plans, outlines, discussions, and ideas which so excited our imagination in the bleak instant, before I fully realized that I
would be left if you were to go for this jogging literally on my own trip.
There's a quote at the beginning of this particular little chapter. The great spirit that moved the world is that long ago, you could not possibly have lived as long as this. It's a quote from the North American Indian
by Fraser, of course. She did not know what she had expected and needs to plan for the best one to be like, but she was not only less taken by the simplicity of this one, Sookie and the other transposed to a drop containing
two airbeds side by side. No power source was visible, nor were there any instruments, even the entrance pro-captain without guidance. Only this was closed behind her. The airbeds, too, became almost impossible to
see in the light from the bare cabin outside. There was a faint difference in their index of reflection, and that was all. The pilot left her light on one, and when she did, I could hardly stretch the deck by real stress
and anxiety. He laid on the side of her on the other, but did not tell her himself. Part of the car worked, she asked him. He looked surprised. After a projection, he said, what else? She could think of an alternative. But
I thought that himself leaving the body behind, such would be infractical. He felt silent, and the pirates were doing nothing not over. Fortunately, she already knew why intercontinental travel, as opposed to
interstellar, had survived the tour. It was because of the nation on Titan, which represented another network which survived the most extreme physical separation from all other enclaves. The Titanium is nothing
of an exchange managed by the ideal. With an exchange for a few supplies, they could not manufacture on their giant moon with towering, very occasional, personal contacts. Their philosophy, which was called
stochasticism, held that real events happen at random, and that it was only to the entropy that most events are undesirable. Therefore, they chose to hold the minimum results in their lives to a minimum, and to
rigidly stop to the few they had to allow. It was participating in their touch with them with limited research into the Jordan system had evolved almost casually by curiosity out of opportunity. How long would the
journey take, she said, eventually? The question is unreal. The pilot closed his eyes and print to fell into deep relaxation mode, moving profoundly but with great slowness. After three moments, a soft violet light
grew around his crown. At first, she was unsure of this, but at the same time, her eyes were the same color and swirled the blood. Some of the victors got leading them both impartially. However, they saw it was both more
intense and more localised than they feel the notion. It blended gradually into a band of white around her eyes, and then the lower part of his head began to go blue, now a green cloak. seething into yellow around his
chest and the ground, and into our own shoulders up to him in layers and hands. His legs began to radiate for found greatness, and at last his feet turned as brown as he now thought. Clearly, this radiance had to be coming
from within him. They could see well that he was depicting him in only as they were arriving from the unmanifest. She met her son, which was frozen clear of the orbit. Oh, many people could let her say that was well known,
but she had never before seen anyone do it. That, a grannian had said, was because no one had the gift, it was just intelligence to use it. Well, as it shows obvious here, but it did explain why she had not anchored
himself. Was this what was called free fall? She did not feel that she herself was falling. completed the order became ardent, but she could not actually sense anything. No, not actually, there seemed to be a soft
warmth inside her, just under her neck. The skin of the vessel would make these changes safely. Curiously, as you could see in the pilot as well as before through his rainbow cocoon, she could no longer see at all
outside the ship, but its investiture was the clear light of the tool. No one was there in his sensation of motion. After a time of some decimate period, the two others since he served as Anglican, in reverse order to the
way they had been his own, and with them the sensation enshrined his belly, which she regretted without knowing why. But she had no time to think about it, for over her head, in her very face, the great rainbow stone that
was Jupiter laid down in silence. Well, it was certainly a more interesting way of traveling, as the exquisite soil has a special tool. It would be to her, in exerted benefit, that the unmanifest could not be persuaded
to transmit anything more complex than small, dissociated molecules. Crossing over those hundreds of millions of miles that way, she and her children could be even better than the ride in an underground car. The
landscape outside was stormy, and her heart could be like the service of the world, except that there is no death. So that the light was violent and brilliant, the shadows were ink-black and there was a sharp her eyes
through. She understood that that was because there was no air. Why, then, were the locks revealed every bit as well? What existed here to alert them?
We heard the evening wasn't complete without a brief reminder of two great interests of James Gish. which have both been referred to before this evening. The first of those is the work of James Joyce. Well, since, as
you've heard, Josephine Saxton felt she must decline the responsibility of reading James Joyce. Who better than James Joyce? So we're going to play a brief extract from that famous recording of Joyce leading the end
of Anna Libby up to Arabelle.
Subdu your nausea and the creature. What is it that a blackberry grows? And that Dwyer Gray asks them for all cauldrons. Are you even happy and lying and Gregory? I mean, I think all the four of them. And they're all of
them. The three of them, that's three on the list. And old Johnny may do be along with them. Is that the three-big flesh of the ant? Far, far. What if I about coasting near the Krishna, or a glow I behold within a hedge, or my
gary come back from the India? Wait till the honeymoon of the moon, Lord. Die is little eat die, we see that wonder in your eyes. We'll meet again, we'll talk once more, the spot I'll sleep if the hour you'll find. My chat
shines higher than the blue milk subset. Forgive me quick, I'll go, go die. And you pluck your match, project me not. You're even low, so safe to jog with them. My sights are swimming ticker only by the shambles for this
place. I saw them, slow in hell, by only way, my valley way, totally out to black mine. Oh, I bet she was a queer-owns, low-shawn-y-ho, I know he a-think-a-toes, and sure he was a queer-own-dance-toe. the old deathly
dumpling, the distant father of singers and druggies. Taper and drummer, you're all my youngsters. Aren't these seven dams to waive him? And every dam's out of seven crutches. And every crutch out of seven hues. And
each of you had a different crime, since, for me, and suffer for you. And the doctors billed for George on the floor, the floor. He married his markets cheap by foul or no, like any intruder in capitalist even. And their
pink, eliminate, creamy burden, and their precious Indian nose. But that naked mass who was despised, Then all that was, was to tell the man, teams of times and happy return was the same in you. All the people are here at
all now, and there was, with me, pure bones to be, not mentioned in the sight folks place. But how about two curators make each one in person, letting you back into his college, out in your sunscreen to your area? Here, of
course, she would be sidelined, We have been caught up in him, problems, problems. Oh, Lord, change of his bosom, Lord, save us. And, oh, oh, they're all known. Huh? He's trickering about his eyes. You know? I'm here
with the letters out. The trickering letters out. Flickering back, he'd nice, back, back. Oh, I do not want a home. What time bellowing? Can't hear the bark of that. All the listening walkers are. Oh, talk to those of
us. Why, please, won't you? I feel at all as young as I am. A ten-ton of shamashankh, all living as darkness and dark-haired as you are. My whole head Oh, I feel as heavy as you understand. Tell me a sound, a sound. Who knows
how much on the little suns and that of us? Night, night. Tell me, tell me, tell me all night, night. Tell me, tell me, a sound of storm. The sound of the river and the water of us. The river and the river and the water of us.
I don't know that way since he was here from James Leish. They're a very different one. We're moving northwards from Dublin and the Dixie to Belfast and the Lagan. In fact, we're moving to Bob Shaw, one of the most
distinguished of our science fiction writers here in this country, and he's going to talk about beer.
I don't know if anybody realizes it, but when Judy was mastermind, it's easy when we're hopping together. see assigned different tasks to different people. And she told me I was to speak about beer. And I'm wondering
why I was chosen for this particular job. It may have been because a couple of years ago at a convention, I was seen standing holding a pint of beer. But I'd like to hasten to add that in This bill didn't belong to me, I was
wondering if there's somebody else.
In fact, it belonged to Harry Harrison, who had just stepped upstairs to write a novel.
Actually, the subject isn't in it's favor to Jim, as we all know. And I first met him, and I expected him to be a very gloomy, very serious type of person in all levels. uh... on the dead and cropped up a lot in his work and i
presume he did find such a man actually said to him, jim don't worry about on the dead end, this won't be the end
of the world okay, in fact there is a long line of connection to s.f. fighters and beer it's fairly unobtrusive but thinking back on it, it's done like this gracefully in cases But then, a lot of people, of course,
introduced beer to Mars in his books. Well, beer kinds, he complained a lot about earthmen, stirring the desert with beer kinds, and spoiled a little bit of the ancient fragile temples. And then in science fiction
fandom in the 50s, I think, there was actually a project to build a pile of beer cans that you'd expand right up to noon. But talking about Jim, he liked beer and he brought bottles of beer along from the conventions,
carefully chosen. But then it says a lot for course in the political case that he even learned to like English pub beer. And this is quite a feat for an American who's used all his life to the chilling, fizzing drink which
is served up in American bars and given into the name of beer. I mean, the girls which exist between that kind of beer and all, they're summed up in a conversation, three-corner conversation. Jim and I were having a more
fun at the Coventry. And this chap is a team member of the camera in the campaign for AOL. And he's describing a beer you've got in a pub, which he was recommending, and he started off describing this pint. He said it was a
bit sour, lukewarm. See, that was a pancake. Perfect. I'm doing ear-enough to agree with him because he hadn't tried to learn to appreciate our kind of beer. I mean, he understood through that A dedicated boozer isn't
put off a drink just because it doesn't taste very nice.
Sometimes we have to force ourselves and it's quite often in my life things I might enjoy myself and going through hell.
I do maybe run over time on perhaps a lot of trivial aspect of what we're talking about this evening. But I've got one final beer story about Jim, and it goes back to the time two years ago when four SCF riders were
commissioned by the Arts Council of Great Britain to do a week-long tour of the Northeast giving talks. And Mark Adelot was one who was there. And then one or two nights in that week, Mark and I put away quite a lot of beer
and other drinks. And then we experienced that the organizers of that, although I was very good weak, had made the ghastly error of putting it into a tampon's hotel. And the lady who ran it was a well-appeared chemical
plant. And then Mark and I arrived home one night about two, one morning about two, and they'd forgotten their keys. And I wonder if very well that last walk up to the hotel was in. We kept looking against each other at
every step, and it was strange this sequence bumping in detail, which went on the both way along that street, but we couldn't help it. We got to the hotel, and it was one of these places made up of what had formerly been a
row of private houses, all joined together. All the entrances seated up tight, except the one which was supposed to use the hotel, and Mark and I hadn't our keys, but we tried all the other doors any time they opened for
years, but we didn't want to face this lady who owned the pub or the hotel, and finally had to knock the door, and she came out in her nightgown and pulled us off very, very severely. So that was a great time that week. but
it's how it meant she wasn't going to put up with people who drank a lot, just behaving like that in her premises. And the next day, that was the fourth day of the week, Dylan was arriving and I was talking to the owner of the
hotel at the lobby, and then she decided to join us part two of the telling off. And it's really gone on and on, but she didn't like boozers, This is Temple and Parsons and then just that moment Jim came into the hall and he
was a bit tired, he had traveled up from London and he was wearing his black coat and his black full neck shirt and his fur hat pulled down and he looked remarkably ascetic and The aunt lady looked at him and said, is this
Mr. Blish? And I said, yes, that's Mr. Blish. And she said, is he a minister? And I said, no, but he has written books which dealt largely with religion. And I just lit up with this and she dashed across the lobby and said,
Mr. Blish, come with me and I'll get you a key. And she went the best way and she put her hands up and said, Can you get a drink line here anywhere? Can you land on either one of us? And that's a sad thing when you speak of Jim's
character. I appreciate all your words just as much. But they have been covered very adequately by other speakers. So I'll stand down. Thank you. And what better way to end than listen to James Blish himself. In 1959, he
won for the first time with Hugo, the supreme accolade of the science fiction world. And the following year, 1960, he invited to be guest of honor at the San Friction Convention of Pittsburgh, Pippcom, 1960. And
happily, a recording was made then of his guest of honor speech. And here are a few brief extracts from it.